---
layout: default
title: Welcome to One Unicorn 2.0!
date: 2020-02-29 13:23
day: 29th
month: February
year: 2020
author: ajcvickers
permalink: 2020/02/29/1unicorn2/
---

# Welcome to One Unicorn 2.0!

I created my first blog back in 2011.
I called it [_One Unicorn_](/2011/03/20/why-one-unicorn/).
It seemed like a good idea at the time... :man_shrugging:

---

## Time to move...

Back then people suggested WordPress for it's ease of use.
It has worked out okay, but, honestly, I was never particularly happy with it.

Then in early 2020 two things happened:

* I started to blog again and I realized that I was quite unhappy with the WordPress experience.

* I moved to Linux as a primary development platform.

So I decided to convert my blog to [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) in [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/), and to use Linux as my platform for doing this.

I still plan to blog more about my experiences with Linux, but for the purpose of this post it has been relatively smooth.
It wasn't super-easy to get Jekyll running locally, but once I did I found it to be very productive.
I've been using [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) for markdown editing and Git tooling.
The Visual Studio Code experience for this on Linux is pretty much the same as on Windows and has been very nice.

(Please don't look at my markdown/css/etc.
I totally hacked this together and it's horrendous!
I'm so not a front-end developer!)

---

## Content and contact

Most the posts from the original blog have been moved over.
(I excluded a couple for personal reasons. Let me know if you can't find something.)

I've updated links, especially to old MSDN blogs that have been moved.
Also, the text and code examples are much easier to read.

No comments yet.
I spend a lot of my time helping people on GitHub and other places; I'm not sure I want to manage another channel here.
For now, contact me on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/ajcvickers) or [GitHub](https://github.com/ajcvickers).

---

## What about the name?

I'm a pretty stereotypical computer geek in a lot of ways.
I like interesting little wordplays, obscure references, and puns.
So when I realized that this was turning into a version 2.0 of One Unicorn, it wasn't long before my mind went:

<div style="text-align: center">

### One Unicorn 2.0
### ⇓
### 1 Unicorn 2
### ⇓
### 1unicorn2

</div>

Then I noticed how many of the letters in "unicorn" can be used to make other little wordplays:

* "UNIxy" since Linux is Unix-like operating system
* "CORe" for .NET Core and EF Core
* "C#" for Visual Basic :wink:
* "Net" for .NET

I have a feeling that in about 10 years I'll be saying, "It seemed like a good idea at the time... :man_shrugging:"

---

Anyway, hope you enjoy the new look-and-feel, and that the content is still (??) interesting.

Thanks,<br>
Arthur
